---
title: "Foundational Courses 2024"
description: "Foundational Courses at the Students' Math Club at Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata."
summary: "3 Courses | 4 Instructors | 2 Semesters"
date: "2024-08-11T21:00:00Z"
---

{{< katex >}}
{{< breadcrumbs >}}

# Fall 2024

## FC2403: Metric Spaces and Topology

- **Audience:** B. Stat, 2nd year students and seniors.
- **Abstract:** This series of lectures will serve as an introduction to topology. Starting with the Euclidean spaces, we will introduce the notion of metric spaces and important properties such as continuity, convergence, compactness, connectedness, and so on. We then define Topological spaces by abstracting out the notion of open sets, and use those to generalize the concepts discussed in the previous talks. These ideas will enable us to discuss results for normed linear spaces.
- **Pre-requisites:** Knowledge of elementary real analysis should be sufficient to follow every detail of this course.
- **Instructors:**
  - Mayank Jangid (M. Math, 2026)
  - R. Vedanta (M. Math, 2026)
- **Schedule:**
  - **Lectures:** All sessions will be held from 9:00 PM.
    - Sunday, 11th August 2024 (Mayank Jangid) - [Notes](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1K9EmMrZB2t4F7LfhHp84yKRkCE_zju_a/view) & [Video](https://youtu.be/iH4Ga6BV0Rc)
    - Saturday, 17th August 2024 (R. Vedanta) - [Notes](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1CHoKYlnTOBM3y5GgdJtiZ-GogpZogJv5/view) & [Video](https://youtu.be/YE8R9zEzC9M)
    - Sunday, 18th August 2024 (Mayank Jangid) - [Notes](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1uj22i3dEpsr1PowKmwXREu8W8J8wfRuw/view) & [Video](https://youtu.be/7YYSWcegKHk)

---

# Spring 2024

## FC2402: Measure Theory and Probability

- **Audience:** B. Stat, 2nd year students and seniors
- **Abstract:** We will study measures and their properties. Starting with a relatively abstract yet motivated setup, we will try to study measures, the Lebesgue Integration Theory, some major results, product measures and the Radon-Nikdoym Theorem. This would be followed by some convergence issues and probability theoretic applications.
- **Pre-requisites:** Metric Topology, Probability and Riemann Integration.
- **Instructors:**
  - Rishiraj Baul (M. Math, 2025)
  - Soham Mallick (M. Stat, 2025)
- **Schedule:**
  - **Lectures:** All sessions will be held from 4:30 PM.
    [TBA]

## FC2401: Group Theory

- **Audience:** B. Stat, 1st year students
- **Abstract:** This course will be an introduction to the theory of groups, specifically its role in the study of symmetry. We will also be discussing the axiomatic foundations of group theory as well as some number theory.
- **Pre-requisites:** None
- **Instructor:** Snehinh Sen (M. Math, 2024)
- **Schedule:**
  - **Lectures:** All sessions will be held from 4:30 PM, unless otherwise mentioned.
    [TBA]
