---
title: "Special Lectures 2023"
description: "Special Lectures for the year 2023 at the Students' Math Club at Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata."
summary: "2 Lectures | No Spring Lecture | 2 Fall Lectures | 1 Guest"
date: "2023-09-25T17:30:00Z"
---

{{< katex >}}

# Fall 2023

## SL2302: Linear Algebra over Rings

- **Speakers:** Prof. [Mrinal Kanti Das](https://www.isical.ac.in/~mrinal/) (ISI, Kolkata)
- **Abstract:** Let $R$ be a commutative ring with 1. A row vector $u= (a_1,\cdots,a_n)\in R^n$ is called _unimodular_ if there is another row vector $v = (b_1,\cdots,b_n)\in R^n$ such that $uv^T=1$. In other words, $a_1b_1+\cdots a_nb_n=1$. Take any matrix $M \in SL_n(R)$. The first row of $M$ is a unimodular row. Now let us ask this intriguing question: Let $u$ be a unimodular row. Is it the first row of a matrix in $ SL_n(R)$?
  We shall explore this question in detail, and if possible, will talk about some recent research as well.
- **Video:** (Not Recorded)
- **Date and Time:** Monday, 25th September 2023, 5:30 PM - 7:00 PM (IST)
- **Venue:** $L^{\infty}$-seminar room, 5th floor, Kolmogorov Bhavan

## SL2301: Weierstrass Approximation Through Bernstein Polynomials: When Probability Helps Analysis

- **Speaker:** Prof. [Parthanil Roy](https://sites.google.com/view/parthanilroy) (ISI, Bangalore)
- **Abstract:** In this lecture, a probabilistic proof of Weierstrass approximation theorem will be presented. Basic probability theory needed for the proof will be developed in a self-contained manner. The statement and motivation of the approximation theorem will also be discussed from the viewpoint of real analysis. This lecture will explain, among other things, how inter-dependent the two subjects (probability theory and real analysis) are. Special care will be taken so that this lecture is accessible to everyone.
- **Slides:** Available [here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/15K5iU0KPLQbcT9afIvX22eW-gFdMe_a1/view)
- **Notes:** Available [here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1gLElIp2oWnvt2hxuqdWiXy2QNZVzl42_/view)
- **Video:** (Not Recorded)
- **Date and Time:** Wednesday, 30th August 2023, 4:30 PM - 6:00 PM (IST)
- **Venue:** $L^{\infty}$-seminar room, 5th floor, Kolmogorov Bhavan
